Design Report: Concurrent Task Dispatcher
==========================================


Overview
--------

This project implements a concurrent task dispatcher in Rust that simulates an
operating-system-style scheduler. A generator thread produces a stream of CPU-bound
and IO-bound tasks, a dispatcher thread routes them through two typed queues, and a
bounded pool of eight worker threads executes them according to a priority-based
scheduling policy with aging. The design emphasizes clear thread roles, minimal
shared state, and a correct termination sequence.


Threads and Major Components
-----------------------------

Five kinds of threads run concurrently, each with one responsibility. The generator
pre-computes 600 task arrival times from a fixed seed, sleeps until each task is
due, and sends it down a channel. Dropping the sender at the end is the shutdown
signal. The dispatcher owns both queues outright — no lock is needed because no
other thread touches them. Each iteration it ingests new tasks from the generator
channel, collects completion reports from workers, and dispatches tasks to idle
workers. Eight worker threads each block on a personal channel waiting for work.
CPU tasks run as a busy-wait spin to consume real CPU time; IO tasks call
thread::sleep to simulate blocking IO. Workers send a CompletionReport back on
completion and exit when they receive None. A monitor thread reads a shared atomic
counter every 500 milliseconds and prints live progress without acquiring any lock.
Main joins all threads in order — generator, dispatcher, workers, monitor — then
prints the final summary.


Shared State and Synchronization
----------------------------------

The two task queues are plain Vec<Task> values owned solely by the dispatcher, so
they need no synchronization at all. The only Mutex in the system wraps the Metrics
struct, which the dispatcher writes on every completion and main reads after all
threads have joined. The live completion counter is an AtomicUsize shared between
the dispatcher (writer) and the monitor (reader); relaxed ordering is sufficient
because an approximate progress count is acceptable. A stop flag implemented as an
AtomicBool lets main signal the monitor to exit after everything else is joined.

Channels carry all task and completion traffic. The generator-to-dispatcher channel
decouples production and consumption rates and doubles as a shutdown notification
when the sender drops. Each worker has its own dispatcher-to-worker channel so the
dispatcher can target a specific idle worker — this is what makes the
reserved-worker policy possible. All eight workers share a single
workers-to-dispatcher channel using mpsc, giving the dispatcher one place to check
for completions rather than polling eight channels separately.


Scheduling Policy
------------------

The system uses priority-based scheduling with aging. Each task is assigned a
random base priority from 1 to 10 at generation time. When the dispatcher selects
the next task it computes an effective priority for every queued task:

    effective_priority = base_priority + (milliseconds_waited / 50)

The task with the highest effective priority across both queues is dispatched next.
Aging — one extra priority point per 50 milliseconds of waiting — prevents
starvation. Without it, a continuous arrival of high-priority tasks could bury a
low-priority task indefinitely. With it, any waiting task will eventually outrank
even a freshly arrived priority-10 task.

An optional reserved-worker extension adds a second layer. Workers 0 and 1 only
pull from the CPU queue; workers 2 through 7 pull from whichever queue holds the
highest-priority task. Critically, the dispatcher selects a task only after knowing
which worker it is dispatching to. This required restructuring the dispatch loop to
drain all idle workers into a snapshot, attempt to assign each one a task, and
requeue any worker for which no suitable task was available.

This policy improved fairness meaningfully in the stressed workload. Reserving two
workers for CPU tasks guaranteed IO tasks always had access to at least six general
workers, cutting the CPU-versus-IO fairness gap from 30 milliseconds to 8
milliseconds — a 73 percent improvement — with no change in makespan. The trade-off
is that reserved workers sit idle whenever the CPU queue is empty, wasting capacity
in IO-heavy workloads. The reservation is also static; it cannot adapt at runtime
if the workload character changes.


A Concurrency Bug Encountered During Development
-------------------------------------------------

The original termination condition was:

    if gen_done && cpu_queue.is_empty() && io_queue.is_empty() && idle.is_empty()

The reasoning was that if no workers were idle they must all be busy finishing their
last tasks. This is wrong. idle.is_empty() is true the moment the dispatcher hands
out the last batch of tasks — before any of those workers has sent a completion
report back. The dispatcher would break out of its loop early, close the completion
channel, and lose every in-flight report. Final metrics would be short by however
many tasks were executing at that moment.

The fix was to change the condition to idle.len() == num_workers. This is only true
when every worker has completed its task, sent a report, and been moved back into
the idle set by the dispatcher. It is the correct quiescence condition: all work is
done, not merely all work dispatched.


Where Starvation Could Still Happen
-------------------------------------

The aging policy does not eliminate all unfairness. If all six general workers
simultaneously pick up long CPU tasks, IO tasks must wait the full duration of
those tasks regardless of how high their effective priority has grown. In the
stressed experiment, average wait times exceeded 1.2 seconds and the maximum
reached 2.4 seconds even with reserved workers in place. Additionally, the aging
divisor of 50 milliseconds was tuned for durations in the 5 to 60 millisecond
range. A workload with longer tasks would need a larger divisor, and a workload
with very short tasks would need a smaller one. Finally, reserved workers become a
liability rather than a benefit if the workload shifts to being mostly IO-bound,
since the two CPU-reserved workers sit idle while IO tasks queue behind the six
general workers.


Experiment Results
-------------------

Two workloads were tested. The balanced workload (50 percent CPU, 50 percent IO,
durations 5-20 ms, arrivals spread over 2 seconds) was straightforward for eight
workers. Makespan was 2001 ms, average wait was effectively 0 ms, utilization was
46 percent, and the fairness gap between task types was 0 ms. Workers were rarely
all busy simultaneously.

The stressed workload (85 percent CPU, durations 10-60 ms, 70 percent of tasks
arriving in the first 80 ms) immediately saturated all workers. Under the pure
priority policy, makespan was 2733 ms, average wait was 1248 ms, max wait was 2433
ms, utilization was 97 percent, and the fairness gap was 30 ms. Switching to the
reserved policy produced nearly identical throughput numbers but cut the fairness
gap to 8 ms, confirming that the reservation effectively protected IO tasks from
being crowded out during a CPU burst.


Lessons Learned
----------------

The most important lesson was that "all queues empty" is not the same as "all work
done." Work in flight must be tracked through completion, not just through
dispatch, and the termination condition must reflect that. The second lesson was
that the worker's identity and the task selection are coupled decisions when workers
have types — the dispatch loop must be structured accordingly. The third was that
the right synchronization primitive depends on the access pattern: the queues needed
no lock, the metrics needed a mutex, and the progress counter needed only an atomic.
Reaching for a mutex everywhere by default would have added complexity without
adding safety.
